# NuFX (ShrinkIt) Archive #

## Primary References ##

- Apple II File Type Note $e0/8002 (NuFX format specification)
- NuFX "final revision three" specification (http://nulib.com/library/old-nufx-spec.htm)
- NuFX Addendum (http://nulib.com/library/nufx-addendum.htm)
- "NuFX: Playing Historian" article in Winter 1990 Call-A.P.P.L.E. magazine (p.97)
- NufxLib source code

## General ##

"NuFX", short for "NuFile eXchange", is a disk and file archive format designed for the
Apple II by Andy Nicholas.  It was designed in conjunction with a program called ShrinkIt,
which featured LZW compression code by Kent Dickey.  The first public versions of the
specification and application were distributed in early 1989.

The specification describes a very flexible file format, and deliberately chooses not to
define how ambiguity should be resolved.  For example, if a record has two resource forks,
the handling of the situation (extract first, extract second, ignore both) is left up to the
discretion of the software.

The compression code was originally intended for compressing floppy disk images, as a
replacement for the relatively ineffective schemes used in programs like DDD.  It grabs 4KB
at a time -- the size of track on a 5.25" disk -- and applies RLE before LZW, because tracks
full of zeroes weren't uncommon.  Some oddities of the original architecture remain, e.g. a
byte to hold the 5.25" disk volume number is part of every compressed file.

There are five relevant filename extensions:
 - .SHK - basic NuFX archive
 - .SDK - NuFX archive that holds a single disk image
 - .BXY - NuFX archive with a Binary II header
 - .SEA - NuFX archive with a GS/ShrinkIt self-extracting archive header (rare)
 - .BSE - NuFX archive with both Binary II and self-extracting archive headers (rare)

## File Layout ##

Archives begin with a 48-byte "master header".  This has a magic number for file identification,
some timestamps, and a count of the number of records in the archive.

This is followed by a series of "records".  Records may contain a variety of parts, including
file icons and resource forks, but ultimately each record represents a single file or disk image.

The individual parts within a record are called "threads".  Threads are identified by a
three-part type: "class", "format", and "kind".  The combination of class and kind determines
the thread's contents and layout.  The format value indicates whether the thread's data is
compressed, and by what algorithm.

## Version Differences ##

The first version of the specification to be widely distributed was "final revision three".
This put 0 in the master version field (or rather, where the master version field was
eventually carved out of the reserved area), and in the record header.  The specification
was updated a few times before reaching its final state, documented in the file type note
dated July 1990.

Master header version 1:
 - Added a version number.
 - Added an 8-byte ProDOS file type and aux type area to the master header.
 - Added the "master EOF" field.

Master header version 2:
 - Removed the ProDOS file type and aux type area from the master header.

Record version 1:
 - Added GS/OS option lists.
 - Removed the "sparse file" flag from the file_sys_info field.

Record version 2:
 - Added a CRC-16 on the compressed data to the thread header.

Record version 3:
 - Switched the thread header CRC-16 to be on the *uncompressed* data.  This allows the CRC to
   check data even when it isn't compressed, and helps detect bugs in the compression code.
 - Moved the preferred location of the filename from the record header to a thread.  (It's okay
   to create filename threads in older records, e.g. the last release of P8 ShrinkIt creates
   v1 records with filenames in threads.)

Version 2 records were only generated by pre-release versions of GS/ShrinkIt [IIRC], and as
such should be extremely rare.

Updates to the specification clarified several things, sometimes in vague ways.  For example,
the original specification stated that the extra_type field should be "ProDOS aux_type or
HFS creator_type", but this was changed to be "what the operating system returns when asked".
This is significant because, under GS/OS, the operating system always returns ProDOS file types,
even for HFS volumes.  (The HFS file type and creator type are returned in the option list.)
Defining an archive format in terms of the behavior of the GS/OS FST is perhaps not ideal, and
since the spec doesn't specify an operating system it leaves open the possibility that archives
created under Mac OS could be different.

The original specification only defined Squeeze and RLE+LZW as compression formats.  Later
versions added LZW/2 and UNIX "compress" LZW (a/k/a LZC).  [I'm not sure when they first appeared
in the spec; the Call-A.P.P.L.E. article mentions them, and uses record version 2.]

The movement of the CRC field across versions merits discussion.  In early archives, the CRC
was written as part of the LZW/1 data, and not included in the header.  In later versions,
the CRC was excluded from LZW/2, and included in the thread header.  This means that some records
could have two CRCs, while others might have none.  As a result, it's unwise to rewrite a
record header unless the record body is also being rewritten, because doing so could result
in the loss of the only CRC.

The CRCs in the LZW/1 data and the version 3 header are both on the uncompressed data.
Unfortunately, the v3 header uses a different initial seed, so it's not possible to simply
copy the LZW/1 CRC out.

ProDOS 8 ShrinkIt generates version 1 records with LZW/1 compression.  GS/ShrinkIt generates
version 3 records with LZW/2 compression.  Both programs can decompress either format.

## Structure ##

Master header:
```
+$00 / 6: signature ("NuFile" in low/high ASCII)
+$06 / 2: master header CRC (spans remaining fields)
+$08 / 4: number of records in archive
+$0c / 8: archive creation date/time
+$14 / 8: archive modification date/time
+$1c / 2: master version
+$1e / 8: (reserved)
+$26 / 4: archive file length, including this header
+$2a / 6: (reserved)
```

Record header block:
```
+$00 / 4: signature ("NuFx" in low/high ASCII)
+$04 / 2: record header CRC (spans remaining fields, including thread array)
+$06 / 2: attrib_count: length of this header, up to and including the filename length field
+$08 / 2: record version number
+$0a / 4: number of threads in record
+$0e / 2: filesystem ID, from GS/OS FST definition
+$10 / 1: filesystem separator char (e.g. '/' or ':')
+$11 / 1: (reserved)
+$12 / 1: access flags
+$13 / 3: (reserved)
+$16 / 4: file type (generally expected to be a ProDOS file type)
+$1a / 4: files: aux type; disks: number of blocks
+$1e / 2: files: ProDOS storage type; disks: device block size (usually 512)
+$20 / 8: creation date/time
+$28 / 8: modification date/time
+$30 / 8: archival date/time (i.e. when it was added to the archive)
+$38 / 2: (record v1+): GS/OS option list length
+$3a /nn: (record v1+): GS/OS option list data (+1 pad byte if the length is odd)
 ...
at attrib_count-2:
+$00 / 2: (deprecated) filename length
+$02 /nn: (deprecated) filename
```

Note that certain fields cannot be interpreted until we establish whether the record represents
a file or a disk image.  That cannot be known without processing the full list of threads.

The record header is followed by an array of 16-byte thread structures:
```
+$00 / 2: thread class
+$02 / 2: thread format
+$04 / 2: thread kind
+$06 / 2: thread CRC (version dependent)
+$08 / 2: uncompressed length (usually)
+$0c / 4: compressed length; this is the number of bytes stored in the archive file
```

The array of headers is followed by the data for each thread, in the same order.

The thread CRC is computed for the compressed data in version 2 records, and for uncompressed
data in version 3 records.  It's only set when the thread class is $0002 (data_thread).

Considered together, the class/kind fields have the following definitions:
 - $0000/0000: ASCII text (deprecated)
 - $0000/0001: comment: uncompressed length is comment length
 - $0000/0002: icon bitmap (never used?)
 - $0001/0000: directory creation directive (never used?)
 - $0002/0000: file data fork
 - $0002/0001: disk image
 - $0002/0002: file resource fork
 - $0003/0000: filename: uncompressed length is filename length

In all cases, the length of the data in the archive is determined by the compressed-length field.
For filenames and comment threads, which are never compressed, the uncompressed length field
indicates the amount of storage actually used.  This arrangement allows the archive to have
over-sized buffers, so that files can be renamed and comments can be expanded without needing
to rewrite the entire archive.

Disk image threads are sized by the storage_type and extra_type fields in the record header,
so the thread EOF field is not used for those, and in fact is zeroed out by some programs.
The uncompressed length of disk image threads is therefore defined by the record header, not
the thread header.

The file span of a single record can be computed by:
 - reading the first part of the header to get the attrib_count and total_threads
 - seeking forward to read the filename length, to determine where the thread headers start
 - reading every thread header and summing up the comp_thread_eof values

The record header CRC covers all header data, including the thread headers.

The specification does not say whether filenames are case-sensitive, or which character set is
used.  Since the primary filesystems are ProDOS and HFS, it's reasonable to assume that
filenames use Mac OS Roman.  Because UNIX implementations exist, the filenames should theoretically
be compared in a case-sensitive fashion when checking for duplicate entries, but in practice a
case-insensitive comparison works fine since nearly all archives are from ProDOS or HFS.

### Disk Images ###

The storage of disk images merits closer examination.  As noted earlier, certain fields in the
header change meaning depending on whether they are used for a file or a disk image, but you
can't know what a record represents until you process all of the threads.  The defining
characteristic is the presence of a disk image thread, and hopefully the absence of data and
resource fork threads.

The uncompressed length of the disk image is defined in two different ways: by the thread_eof,
and by a combination of the extra_type field (which becomes a block count) and the storage_type
field (which becomes a block size).  Various versions of ShrinkIt put bad values into these
fields, making it difficult to know exactly how to interpret the contents.

The "NuFX Addendum" page has some recommendations for resolving these issues.

## Wrappers ##

NuFX archives may be "wrapped" with a Binary II header.  This is not really NuFX-in-Binary-II,
as Binary II isn't intended to be an archive format; rather, this is just a way to preserve
the ProDOS file attributes of the archive (type=$e0 aux=$8002).  If a wrapped archive is updated,
the file length stored in the Binary II header must be updated.  The storage size fields aren't
really used, and setting them precisely is difficult, so they may be updated to an approximate
value, zeroed out, or simply ignored.

Archives created by GS/ShrinkIt may also have a self-extracting archive wrapper.  The format
of this was never published, but the important parts can be gleaned by examining the files.
The executable has two OMF segments.  The first is the code segment, which is $2ea2 (11938) bytes
long, and is identical for all archives.  The second holds the NuFX data.

The second segment has a minor bug: the DISPDATA field for the second segment is one byte too
long.  Instead of finding an LCONST record with the length of the NuFX data, the GS/OS loader
would encounter the low byte of the length value, and try to treat it as an opcode.  This doesn't
actually matter, because the segment has the "skip" flag set in its KIND field, so GS/OS doesn't
try to load it.

Three locations must be adjusted for the length of the NuFX archive:
```
+$2ea2 / 4: header BYTECNT field, holds NuFX length + 68
+$2eaa / 4: header LENGTH field, holds the NuFX length
+$2ee1 / 4: LCONST record, holds the NuFX length
```
The NuFX data begins at $2ee5, 12005 bytes from the start.  To be a correct OMF segment, a
single $00 byte must be appended to the end of the file to act as an END opcode.

(Some details... the BYTECNT field holds the total size of the segment. The value "68" is the
size of the OMF segment header and opcodes: the header is 62 bytes long, and is followed by a
5-byte LCONST record with the NuFX data, and a 1-byte END record.  The bug mentioned earlier can
be fixed by changing the value at $2ecc from 63 to 62, but doing so will cause the app to
conclude that it has been corrupted and refuse to run.)
